---
layout: default
---

# Chapters #
## [Chapter 1: Introduction of Computer Networks](content/ch01.pdf) ##	
In this Chapter, we first present the foundations of computer networks focusing on packet switching networks in *Section 1.1 Network Foundations*. Details will be provided to explain what addresses will be used at different layers of the TCP/IP protocol stack in *Section 1.2 Addresses*. In *Section 1.3*, we will present basic concepts to understand physical and virtual networks; several important inter-networking protocols and services are illustrated in *Section 1.4 Network Services*; and finally, IP network routing is introduced in *Section 1.5 IP Routing*.


## [Chapter 2: Virtual Networking](content/ch02.pdf) ##	
In this Chapter, we provide a review of virtual network solutions. Compared to a physical network, which is a network of physical machines that are connected; a virtual network is a technical approach that provides mapping functions to represent various logical views or isolations of underlying physical networks at the network layer of the TCP/IP protocol stack to better serve its supported applications for easier management and stronger security protection. In this Chapter, we first provide a few definitions to clarify the differences among physical networks, virtual networks, overlay networks, and logical networks in *Section 2.1 Virtual Networks*. Next, we focus on layer-2 virtual networking techniques and realizations in *Section 2.2 Layer-2 Virtual Networking*. Then, in *Section 2.3 Tunneling Protocols* and *Virtual Private Networks* (VPNs), we describe a closely related concept -- Virtual Private Network (VPN) at different layers of the protocol stack. Finally, we briefly discuss virtual networking and forwarding concepts in *Section 2.4 Virtual Routing and Forwarding*.  


## [Chapter 3: SDN and NFV](content/ch03.pdf) ##	
In this Chapter, we examine two new paradigms that helped *stretch* the traditional IP infrastructure in the information age. First amongst these, is Network Functions Virtualization (NFV), which as the name suggests, moved network functions from stand alone appliances to software running on any server - reducing the time-to-market for products. The second, is a more clean slate approach using Software-Defined Networks (SDN), wherein separation of control and data plane leads to a highly agile and dynamic environment. These two technologies, along with some benefits, challenges and use cases are described in detail next. 


## [Chapter 4: Network Security Preliminaries](content/ch04.pdf) ##	
Network security consists of the policies and practices adopted to prevent and monitor unauthorized access, misuse, modification, or denial of a computer network and network-accessible resources. Network security involves the authorization of access to data in a network, which is traditionally controlled by the network administrator.  To achieve the goal of network security, one must first understand attackers, what could become their targets, how these targets might be attacked, what gains attackers can derive, and consequences that the victim will suffer. Thus, how to model attacks is the first target of this Chapter. The rest of this Chapter is arranged as follows: In *Section 4.1 Basic Concepts of Computer Network Security*, basic concepts are presented including threat and attack models, layered security defense, and cyber killer chain; network mapping and port scanning based network reconnaissance is presented in *Section 4.2 Network Reconnaisance*; preventive network security approaches such as firewall and IPS are described in *Section 4.3 Preventive Techniques*; network intrusion prevention and secure logging services are presented in *Section 4.4 Detection and Monitoring*; and finally, the *network security assessment* approaches is presented in *Section 4.5*.


## [Chapter 5: SDN and NFV Security](content/ch05.pdf) ##	
Network Functions Virtualization (NFV) has emerged as a technology to provide a virtualized implementation of hardware-based equipment such as firewall, routers, Intrusion Detection System (IDS). Virtual Network Functions (VNFs) can be realized through virtual machines (VMs) or containers running on top of the physical server of cloud computing infrastructure. Software-Defined Networking (SDN) acts as enabling technology for NFV. Despite the great benefits offered by SDN and NFV, the security, privacy and trust management still remains an important problem to be addressed. The architecture of SDN and NFV has been discussed in previous chapters. In this chapter, we discuss the security challenges faced by different components of SDN and NFV, some that are part of traditional network architecture, and some introduced because of the SDN/NFV framework that should be considered before deployment of SDN/NFV technologies in a cloud network or data-center. 
We survey the *threat model and security challenges* in NFV in *Section 5.1*. *Section 5.2* has been dedicated to the classification of *NFV security* from the perspective of intra and inter-virtual network functions (VNF) design. We also introduce some of the defense mechanisms that are used in NFV to deal with current threat vectors. In *Section 5.3*, we consider *SDN security* threat vectors. *Section 5.2.2* provides guidelines for the design of a secured SDN platform. Additionally, we discuss the threat vectors specific to the SDN data plane, SDN architecture, OpenFlow protocol and OpenFlow switching software in this section. 

## [Chapter 6: Microsegmentation](content/ch06.pdf) ##	
Microsegmentation\index{Microsegmentation} is a method of creating secure zones in data centers and cloud deployments to isolate workloads from one another and secure them individually to make network security more granular. The rise of SDN and NFV has paved the way for microsegmentation to be realized in software to easy the deployment and management. In this Chapter, a brief history of firewall and transitions to microsegmentation is firstly described in *Section 6.1 From Firewall to Microsegmentation* and followed with distributed firewall in *Section 6.2 Distributed Firewalls* microsegmentation system and models are described in *Section 6.3 Microsegmentation* and finally the implementation based on VMWare solutions is presented in *Section 6.4 Case Study: VMWare NSX Microsegmentation.*

## [Chapter 7: Moving Target Defense](content/ch07.pdf) ##	
*Moving Target Defense* (MTD) has been used as a defensive technique in many fields such as one on one air combats, Go game, chess, etc. The goal is to deceive the attacker. MTD allows the administrator to change the static nature of cloud resources. The cloud system information that is accessible to the attacker, such as open ports, Operating System (OS) information, software version information together constitute the *Attack Surface*. By introducing MTD, the static nature of a cloud system can be changed to dynamic. The homogeneous attack surface becomes asymmetric and heterogeneous. The constantly changing attack surface reduces the probability of successful exploits by the attacker. 

In this chapter, we introduce MTD based proactive security. The introduction of cyber kill chain, and how MTD can help in disruption of attack propagation at various stages of attack has been discussed in *Section 7.1*. The classification of *different types of MTD mechanisms*, along with illustrative examples has been discussed in *Section 7.2*. We consider some examples of *SDN based MTD frameworks* that utilize Service Randomizatio, OS hiding and other obfuscation techniques using SDN based command and control, has been discussed in *Section 7.3*. *Section 7.4* considers *MTD as a game between attacker and defender* and discussed existing approaches that leverage game theoretic detection and defense mechanisms to deal with security attacks. The *evaluation of the effectiveness* of different MTD frameworks has been provided in *Section 7.5*.

## [Chapter 8: Attack Representation](content/ch08.pdf) ##	
One of the key components of network defense is representation and visualization of network attacks. Security provisioning in a large network consists of proper authentication of users, authorization of access to software and hardware resources in the network, proper storage and transfer of data across the network. There are multiple entry points of data ingress and egress in a network. Since the volume of information is huge to be analyzed by a human expert, we need logical and efficient data structures for tracking current and potential future activity of normal users and attackers in the network. This is very critical from the point of Threat Assessmen, risk analysis and Attack Containment. 
 
In this chapter, we introduce many states of the art data structures that have been utilized in the representation of security threats and the propagation of attack, which makes security assessment easier for a security administrator. 
We introduce the *cybersecurity metrics* that are currently used in industry and research for quantification of security threats in *Section 8.1*, along with an illustrative example of attack propagation in a network. The qualitative and quantitative metrics that are discussed in this section, serve as a motivation of *attack graph* introduced in *Section 8.2*, which are one of the most popular data structure for attack representation. We also consider *probabilistic analysis* and threat ranking using attack graphs in *Section 8.2*. Another important data structure *attack tree* has been described in *Section 8.3*, along with examples of attack propagation represented using an attack tree. Attack trees serve as a foundation for *attack countermeasure trees* (ACT's) that showcase the countermeasures to detect and mitigate attacks in a network along with a *qualitative and quantitative analysis* of different detection and mitigation techniques. We discuss some other *attack representation models* in *Section 8.5* and analyze the *limitations* of different *attack representation methods* in *Section 8.6*.
 
## [Chapter 9: Service Function Chaining](content/ch09.pdf) ##	 
There has been a shift in paradigm from host-centric model to the data-centric model. The network services and computation capacity is available closer to the users. The cloud and data center network and cloud architecture require flexible network function deployment models. The advent of technologies such as NFV allow *Cloud Service Providers* (CSPs) to provision *Virtual Network Functions* (VNFs) as opposed to physical networking infrastructure, e.g., a traditional router can be replaced by virtual router software. In a traditional network, a sequence of steps is required when connecting various hardware components responsible for handling the traffic coming into and going out of the network. 
 
*Service function chaining* (SFC) is one way of providing end-to-end network connectivity while maintaining different service level agreements (SLAs) promised by CSPs. In this chapter, we discuss different SFC objectives, design and deployment considerations and challenges faced by CSPs in SFC provisioning. Keeping in line with the main theme of the book, one section has been dedicated to security provisioning using SFC framework. The *motivation for SFC* along with high-level *design goals* has been discussed in *Section 9.1*. The SFC *architecture, core concepts, and challenges* introduced in SFC by topological dependencies, resource availability and configuration complexity have been discussed in *Section 9.2*. The SFC on top of *SDN/NFV framework with different applications* such as segment routing has been described in *Section 9.3*. *Section 9.4* introduces different *SFC research projects* based testbed and their architectures, such as T-Nova and Tacker. The *policy composition for SFC deployment* has been discussed in *Section 9.5*. The research works in the field of *secured service function chaining* such as secure in cloud chaining (SICS) and network security defense pattern (NSDP) have been discussed in *Section 9.6*. 

## [Chapter 10: Security Policy Management in Distributed SDN Environment](content/ch10.pdf) ##	
The ease of programmability in SDN makes it a great platform for implementation of various initiatives that involve application deployment, dynamic topology changes, and decentralized network management in a multi-tenant data center environment. This programmability gives great flexibility in implementing applications as well as security solutions. Having flexibility also lends to the possibility of policy conflicts - both intentional and unintended. Throw in the ability to have multiple SDN controllers to complicate the situation by having potentially different policies in place for the same traffic! Thus, implementing security solutions in such an environment is fraught with policy conflicts and consistency issues with the hardness of this problem being affected by the distribution scheme for the SDN controllers. 

In this Chapter, the implications of *security policy conflicts* is discussed first. Next a *formalism for flow rule conflicts* in SDN environments is described. A *comprehensive conflict detection and resolution models* ensure that no two flow rules in a distributed SDN-based cloud environment have conflicts at any layer; thereby assuring consistent conflict-free security policy implementation and preventing information leakage. *Strategies for prioritizing and unassisted resolution* of these conflicts are also detailed. 

## [Chapter 11: Intelligent Software-Defined Security](content/ch11.pdf) ##	
Software-Defined Security is an approach to implementing, managing and controlling information security in a computing environment using the software. The security components such as intrusion detection, access control, network segmentation are automated and managed through software. There is very limited or no hardware-based security dependence. The software-defined networking framework helps in managing and orchestrating the security needs of an organization in an intelligent fashion. The *Intelligent Software-Defined Security* (ISDS) that we discuss in this chapter comprises of key properties of an intelligent software system such as situation awareness, self-healing, end-to-end monitoring, network analytic capability, and feedback mechanism to dynamically reconfigure the network in case of any compromising activity. 
   
We discuss some important architectural considerations in the application of machine learning and *AI in security* in *Section 11.1*. Different *Machine Learning* (ML) and *Artificial Intelligence* (AI) techniques such as neural networks, expert systems, learning mechanisms along with their security applications have been briefly discussed in this section. Additionally, we use an *Intrusion Detection System* (IDS) as an example to showcase the application of intelligence in the field of security in *Section 11.1*. *SDN based intelligent security design* that incorporates ML and AI have been described in *Section 11.1.4*. *Section 11.2* has been dedicated to the study of *Advanced Persistent Threats* (APTs). The difference between traditional attacks and APTs, examples of most notable APT events and vulnerabilities have been discussed in this section. The techniques used in *detection and mitigation of APT* have been discussed in *sub-section 11.2.4*. *Sub-section 11.2.5* describes the use of *SDN based micro-segmentation* and *defense-in-depth security* to disrupt the propagation of APTs. *Section 11.4* has been dedicated to the study of *problems associated* with the *application of intelligence in security* such as variance in network traffic, high cost or errors because of incorrect attack prediction. 
